Add "Upgrade to Airflow 2" docs to Astro (#844)
astronomer/docs: astro/upgrade-to-airflow-2.md

---
title: "Upgrade to Airflow 2"
sidebar_label: "Upgrade to Airflow 2"
id: upgrade-to-airflow-2
description: "Prepare for and upgrade to Airflow 2.0+ on Astronomer."
---

> This guide explains how to upgrade an Airflow project from 1.10.15 to 2.3 and migrate it to Astro.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to upgrade an Airflow project from 1.10.15 to 2.3 and migrate it to Astro.
```
Remove

As a follow up to Airflow 2.0, Airflow 2.3 was released in May 2022 with new features like dynamic task mapping and a Grid view in the Airflow UI. Given the significance of this release, Astronomer is providing full support for Airflow 2.3 until October 2023.

> Astronomer strongly recommends upgrading any Astronomer Software Deployments currently running Airflow 1.10.15 to Airflow 2.3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astronomer recommends that you upgrade all Astronomer Software Deployments currently running Airflow 1.10.15 to Airflow 2.3.
```

## The benefits of Airflow 2.0+

> Airflow 2.0 was built to be fast, reliable, and infinitely scalable. Among the hundreds of new features both large and small, Airflow 2.0 includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow 2.0 provides the following benefits over previous versions:
```

- [Refactored Airflow Scheduler](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/scheduler.html#running-more-than-one-scheduler) for enhanced performance and high-availability.
- [Full REST API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html) that enables more opportunities for automation.
- [Smart Sensors](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/smart-sensor.html) that execute as single, long-running tasks.
- [TaskFlow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts.html#taskflow-api) for a simpler way to pass information between tasks.
- [Independent Providers](https://github.com/apache/airflow/tree/master/airflow/providers) for improved usability and a more agile release cadence.
- Simplified KubernetesExecutor for ultimate flexibility in configuration.
- [UI/UX Improvements](https://github.com/apache/airflow/pull/11195) including a new Airflow UI and auto-refresh button in the **Graph** view.

> Airflow 2.3 subsequently introduced several powerful features, the most notable of which is [dynamic task mapping](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.3.0/concepts/dynamic-task-mapping.html). For more information on Airflow 2.3, see ["Apache Airflow 2.3.0 is here"](https://airflow.apache.org/blog/airflow-2.3.0/) and the [Airflow 2.3.0 changelog](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.3.0/release_notes.html#airflow-2-3-0-2022-04-30).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow 2.3 introduced several new features, including [dynamic task mapping](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.3.0/concepts/dynamic-task-mapping.html). For more information about Airflow 2.3, see ["Apache Airflow 2.3.0 is here"](https://airflow.apache.org/blog/airflow-2.3.0/) and the [Airflow 2.3.0 changelog](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.3.0/release_notes.html#airflow-2-3-0-2022-04-30).
```

## Prerequisites

> This setup requires:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This setup requires:
```

Remove. You don't need stem or introductory sentences to introduce a list of prerequisites or a task.

- The latest version of the [Astro CLI](configure-cli.md).
- An Airflow project running Airflow 1.10.15.

## Step 1: Migrate your Airflow code to an Astro project

> An Astro project structure is required for deploying code to Astro. To migrate an existing Airflow project to an Astro project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Astro project structure is required for deploying code to Astro.
```
Question: Is _structure_ necessary?

Author: I guess not, I wanted to include it so that people realized the project was required due to its file organization as opposed to any different content. But I realize now that the included Dockerfile makes that statement inaccurate.

> 1. [Create an Astro project](create-project.md) using the Astro CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Create an Astro project](create-project.md) using the Astro CLI.
```

Link to task?

Author: Since it's step 1 in the doc and the other steps don't necessarily impede on this setup, I think it's fine to link to the general doc.

2. Delete the example DAGs included in the project.
3. Move DAGs from your open source project to the `dags` folder in your Astro project.

> 4. In your Astro project's `Dockerfile`, replace the `FROM` line with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In the Astro project `Dockerfile`, replace the `FROM` line with:
```

    ```dockerfile
    FROM quay.io/astronomer/ap-airflow:1.10.15-buster-onbuild
    ```

>     This image serves as a bridge between your open source Airflow project and Airflow 2.3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This image serves as a bridge between your open source Airflow project and Airflow 2.3.
```
Is _bridge_ the correct terminology here? Would _connects_ work better? For example:

_This image connects your open source Airflow project to Airflow 2.3._

If this doesn't work, describe the behavior. For example:

_This image allows your open source Airflow project to communicate with Airflow 2.3._

Author: 1.10.15 is the bridge release to 2.0 [as described by OSS Airflow](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/upgrading-from-1-10/index.html#step-2-upgrade-to-1-10-15)

5. Move OS-level dependencies from your open source project to the `packages.txt` file in your Astro project.
6. Move OS-level dependencies from your open source project to the `requirements.txt` file in your Astro project.
7. Open your Astro project and run `astro dev start` to your code in a local Airflow environment.

## Step 2: Run the Airflow upgrade check script

> Most Airflow 1.10.15 DAGs will work in Airflow 2.0, though not all. The Airflow 2.0 upgrade check script can check for compatibility issues in your DAG code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all Airflow 1.10.15 DAGs work in Airflow 2.0,. The Airflow 2.0 upgrade check script can check for compatibility issues in your DAG code.
```

> To run the Airflow 2.0 upgrade check script, open your Astro project and run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the Airflow 2.0 upgrade check script and install the latest version of the `apache-airflow-upgrade-check` package at runtime, open your Astro project and run the following command:
```

```shell
astro dev upgrade-check
```

> This command installs the latest version of the `apache-airflow-upgrade-check` package at runtime and outputs results from the corresponding Airflow CLI command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command outputs results from the corresponding Airflow CLI command.
```
I'm not clear what the output is for this. Can you clarify?

Author: Tried to clarify what the output shows a bit more.

In the upgrade check output, you can ignore the `Fernet is enabled by default` and `Check versions of PostgreSQL, MySQL, and SQLite to ease upgrade to Airflow 2.0` tests. All of these details are handled by Astronomer. You can also ignore the and `Users must set a kubernetes.pod_template_file value` test even if you are running the Kubernetes executor.

For more information on upgrade check functionality, see [Upgrade Check Script](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/2.1.3/upgrade-check.html) in Apache Airflow documentation.

## Step 3: Prepare Airflow 2.0 DAGs

> The next step is to review the results from Airflow's upgrade check script and make all necessary changes to your import statements, DAGs, and configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Review the results from the Airflow upgrade check script and then update your import statements, DAGs, and configurations if necessary.
```

### a. Import operators from backport providers

> All Airflow 2.0 operators and extras are backwards compatible with both Airflow 1.10.14 and Airflow 1.10.15. To use these providers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Airflow 2.0 operators and extras are backwards compatible with both Airflow 1.10.14 and Airflow 1.10.15. 
```
Why should a user complete this task? What is the benefit?

1. Add all necessary providers in your `requirements.txt` file

> 2. Modify your import statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Modify your import statements.
```

> 3. Add any extras if needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add any extras if needed.
```
What are _extras_? How does a user determine if they are required?

For more information, see [1.10.15 Backport Providers](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/1.10.15/backport-providers.html) in Apache Airflow documentation, or see the collection of [Backport Providers in PyPi](https://pypi.org/search/?q=apache-airflow-backport-providers&o=).

### b. Modify Airflow DAGs

> Depending on your DAGs, you might need to modify your code to be 2.0-compatible. This can include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your DAGs, you might need to make the following changes to make sure your code is compatible with Airflow 2.0:
```

- Changes to undefined variable handling in templates.
- Changes to the KubernetesPodOperator.
- Changing the default value for `dag_run_conf_overrides_params`.

> For more compatibility considerations, see [Step 5: Upgrade Airflow DAGs](http://apache-airflow-docs.s3-website.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/docs/apache-airflow/latest/upgrading-to-2.html#step-5-upgrade-airflow-dags) in Apache Airflow documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For other compatibility considerations, see [Step 5: Upgrade Airflow DAGs](http://apache-airflow-docs.s3-website.eu-central-1.amazonaws.com/docs/apache-airflow/latest/upgrading-to-2.html#step-5-upgrade-airflow-dags) in Apache Airflow documentation.
```

## Step 4: Upgrade to Airflow 2.3

> If your DAGs and configurations pass the upgrade check script above, you're ready to officially upgrade to Airflow 2.3.0. The upgrade process itself is the same as any other on Astronomer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the upgrade check script didn't identify any issues with your existing DAGs and configurations, you're ready to upgrade to Airflow 2.3.0. 
```

> To upgrade to Airflow 2.3.0:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To upgrade to Airflow 2.3.0:
```
Remove

1. Replace the `FROM` line in your Astro project's `Dockerfile` with the following:

    ```dockerfile
    FROM quay.io/astronomer/astro-runtime:5.0.4
    ```

> 2. Modify all backport providers and replace them with fully supported [provider packages](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html). For example, if you were using the [Mongo backport provider](https://pypi.org/project/apache-airflow-backport-providers-mongo/), replace `apache-airflow-backport-providers-mongo` with `apache-airflow-providers-mongo` in your `requirements.txt` file. For more information, see [Airflow documentation on provider packages](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Modify all backport providers and replace them with the supported [provider packages](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html). For example, if you were using the [Mongo backport provider](https://pypi.org/project/apache-airflow-backport-providers-mongo/), replace `apache-airflow-backport-providers-mongo` with `apache-airflow-providers-mongo` in your `requirements.txt` file. For more information, see [Airflow documentation on provider packages](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html).
```

3. Restart your local environment and open the Airflow UI to confirm that your upgrade was successful.

> ### Upgrade considerations

Author: Because you can't really prepare for any of these details I think it makes more sense as a sub-topic in the last step. This is when you actually upgrade and need to consider these details. If the considerations had to do with breaking changes, compatibility, or details to make the upgrade successful, then I'd agree.

> Apache Airflow 2.3 includes changes to the schema of the Airflow metadata database. When you first upgrade to Runtime 2.3, consider the following:

Author: Because you can't really prepare for any of these details I think it makes more sense as a sub-topic in the last step. This is when you actually upgrade and need to consider these details. If the considerations had to do with breaking changes, compatibility, or details to make the upgrade successful, then I'd agree.
